Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Juan Tech. He is
Australian Research Council de Raffaello at the Evolution of
Cultural Cultural Diversity Initiative School of Culture, History and
Language at, at the Australian National University and also
scientific vice coordinator at the Center for Interdisciplinary Studies
at the University of Coimbra. He is a population
geneticist focusing on the evolution of humans and closely
related species. His main research focus revolves around human
evolution during the Pleistocene, in particular, the egg mixture
events between so-called modern and archaic humans after the
out of Africa and before human colonization of Saul.
So, and today we're talking about modern humans, human
dispersal, the the nizo ones and the neanderthals balancing
selection and some other related topics. So, Doctor Teixeira,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Uh Thank you so much, Ricardo. It's a pleasure
to be here.
OK. So let's start here perhaps with a question
that I've already asked several times on the show
to paleoanthropologists specifically. But what are modern humans and
archaic humans? What does that mean
exactly? Well, that's a, that's a good question. I
don't know. Um No, seriously, I think uh the
terms come uh from, of course, they have an
historical um background to them. Uh AND they result
from uh typology classification of fossil groups. So people
looking at fossil bones and saying, which are more
closely related to humans based on their appearance, based
on their morphological traits, those that similarly uh that
are, you know, old fossils like from the Pleistocene,
for example, tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands
of years old, those that look slightly more different
to whatever the distribution of those traits are in
people today. They are called archaic. And that term
is itself archaic because it sort of takes us
to, um, an idea of uh potentially these groups
being, um, you know, the, I think, I think
it's a loaded word where I'm going to use.
It's not my word, but it's, it's not what
I think. Um, BUT this is what might take
people to, is to think of these groups as
inferior in some ways. Um And I think that's,
there's no, um, sort of, uh good, good evidence
for that to stand on. Um But, and then
the ones that look more like people today that,
you know, are first seen in Africa, they are
called modern humans. So basically what happens is that
paleoanthropologists looking at the bones in, in, in the
field, uh they can sort of start and start
classifying different traits, morphologically. And then they start grouping,
they are useful classifications in the sense that they
allow us to have intelligible conversations. But um you
know, moderns would be everything that looks like people
today, archaic, everything that looks slightly different.
But just to be sure these terms apply exclusively
to Homo sapiens. Correct. I mean, I'm asking you
that because sometimes when we talk about human evolution,
we refer not only to our species, Homo sapiens,
but also other closely related species. Sometimes we are
referring to the entire homogenous.
Yes. And the archaic refer to all the groups.
Actually, the ar cakes are like neanderthals would be
considered archaic homo would be considered archaic Homo ailes.
And then the moderns are the Homo sapiens, right?
So, but you already get an idea of what
I, where I stand on this um, classifications.
Uh Yes, because we're going to get uh uh
a little bit later into our interbreeding with other
species like the neanderthals and the, the miso ones.
Uh We're going to talk about that. Uh But,
uh I also asked you that question to clarify
where actually the term modern human applies because, uh
I mean, since we interbred with neanderthals at least,
uh and, uh and we are so so closely
related, not just historically in terms of our genetics,
uh and our morphology as well, I guess. So,
I was just wondering if by any chance uh
modern humans could also apply to neanderthals or, or
other closely related species. No,
not canonically not, not. So when we're, when we're
having these discussions, when we say archaic, archaic does
not include the neanderthals or uh sorry, archaic, includes
the neanderthals and does not include the modern humans.
The modern humans are the Homo sapiens. Maybe that's
what I should have started my answer. But essentially,
um those are, you know, social classifications.
OK. So I, I want to talk now about
uh out of Africa migration migrations by, we're going
to start with Homo Sapiens, but then we'll probably
take a few steps back because it's also very
interesting to understand uh what species exactly first migrated
out of Africa where they went to. Exactly. But
uh le let's go first with Homo sapiens. So
what do we know exactly about out of Africa
migrations by Homo Sapiens uh up till uh around
the, the period where we basically colonized Saul.
Well, um so what we know is that these
forms of uh so called modern or anatomically modern
humans. So Homo sapiens first emerged in Africa around,
uh it's pushing back now, I think 300,000 is
the earlier proposal in North Africa and Morocco, there's
uh some fossil evidence of uh modern human presence
uh up to that point or starting at that
point. And then we know that uh th these
fossil forms start sort of appearing in the fossil
records of the Middle East and then, uh across
the rest of the world around uh 60,000, 60
between 70 50,000 years ago. Um And then of
course, these, these states keep changing, right? Because we
keep calibrating uh and getting a better understanding on
of, you know, when, when the first migrations happened.
Uh But there's stone tool evidence, for example, in,
in, in Indonesia uh associated with lithic artifacts associated
with more humans, with anatomically modern humans. Um The
cave called Lida A which is uh I think
around 70,000 years ago. So what we know is
that once that spread took over, it was fast.
So people went from Africa across the rest of
the world in a relatively short period of time.
So that occurred quite swiftly. Uh Of course, that
does not negate the possibility that other migrations occurred
uh before, right. So it's not to say that
people were always stuck in Africa and then they
only moved together as a pilgrimage in a certain
specified time period. This was much more likely a
highly dynamic process that took thousands of years. Um
And we know, for example, that modern humans contributed
genetically to neanderthals uh around 100,000 years ago. So
there was a modern human migration from Africa to
Europe that resulted in detectable genetic admixture with neanderthals
around 100,000 years ago, right? That should already tell
you that those movements uh out of Africa were
not necessarily like a one migration event but they
were probably much, much more nuanced events um that
occur, occurred across a wide range of time.
So when we talk about almost Sapiens migrations out
of uh migration out of Africa, it was not
one single migration event right out of Africa.
Yeah. So that's how it's modeled because it's useful,
it's simplistic. Uh BUT in reality, um this was
much more likely, uh you know, uh a complex
process, right? It's not like somebody just, you know,
suddenly remembered and say, yeah, OK, I'm going out
of Africa, please follow me and then everybody just
felt like just follow as a pilgrimage. Um So,
so, but of course, it's a use, you can
model it use in a useful way as a
single wave, right? So, and what do we mean
by single wave? We mean that the descendants of
those migrations out of Africa uh around 70,000, 60,000
years ago because the descendants of that big big
one wave migration as we are modeling it are
people living outside of Africa today, right? So all
of us, you know, descend to a great extent,
not all, not entirely but to a great extent
to that one wave migration. And because we can
model it as a one wave um that also
allows us to then interrogate what was happening in
other parts of the world as these people en
encountered other groups of people that we've archaically classified
as archaic. Um But if we model this in
a single wave model, then we can start asking
what's happening in other parts of the world.
But so we got out of Africa and went
through, uh went across Asia and then it was
into Australia and Oceania right before we crossed, I
guess the Bering Strait into the Americas.
Yes, that's uh yes. So the earlier evidence for
the colonization of Saul, which was the supercontinent that
included both Australia and New Guinea due to lowered
sea levels. Uh The earlier estimate is 65,000 years
ago in a uh a site called Maja Bibi.
Um There's evidence uh for human presence there, although
it's been disputed. Um But I guess, you know,
for our conversation here of like the dispersal of
modern humans that nuance is like less important. Um
But then there's, there's a, there's a many sites
around 50,000. Uh THE Bering Strait crossing, it was
estimated at around 15,000 until recently, 15,000 years ago.
It's been pushed slightly back. And there's also an
hypothesis called the uh the Beringia standstill where people
might have actually inhabited Barring because it was like,
uh you know, it was a habitable land area
where people could stay, but then they could migrate
south. Uh And so they were sort of stuck
in Beringia for a while. Uh But that's again,
this is something that's emerging. Uh The picture is
emerging. But yes, so people left Africa, let's say
around 60,000 years ago, they moved into Eurasia, both
Europe and Asia. Southeast Asia arrived in Australia at
least at 50,000 years ago. And the crossing through
the Bering is Bering. Beringia might have occurred around
20,000.
Mhm. So, ok. So o off the record before
we started our conversation, uh, I, I wasn't expecting
to ask you about this beforehand, but, uh, I
guess that we also have to include this topic
here. It's very interesting. I was saying of record
that, uh, even though I've already interviewed many paleoanthropologists
on the show, I've never talked with anyone before
about, uh, like ominous or ominate evolution in Portugal,
for example. And from that, we went into, OK,
so what ominous species were really present in Europe.
And we were saying that we know that Homo
sapiens was here, of course, neanderthals. But apart from
that, I mean, the rest, we are not really
sure of, I mean, as far as we know
they weren't here, but, uh, let's perhaps take a
few steps back and talk about also the other
hominid species, particularly the species that are part of
the homogenous, starting with homo erectus. So, because that
was the first species that actually as far as
we know, uh migrated out of Africa,
correct, uh, we will get back to that because
there's another hypothesis when we talk, I guess if
we're talking about Island Southeast Asia, I think we'll,
we'll go back to that to this point of
who, who migrated out of Africa and when and
like events. But yes, as far as we can
tell Homo actus was uh the first migrant, uh
let's call it the first migrant out of Africa.
Uh And that, that migration occurred at around 2
million years ago. And we have solid evidence of
uh Homo presence in Asia. There's fossils in Georgia,
there's also fossils in China at around 1.8 million
years ago, if I'm not mistaken, and then down
to Island, Southeast Asia in Java for at least
1.5 million, right? And so, uh that was the,
so there's no, there's no one out of Africa,
there are multiple out of Africa's, right? And then
the question is, and then I think paleoanthropology uh
in the late 20th century, early, you know, 21st
century, the discussion was about how much the these
groups, these fossil groups contribute to the modern uh
to the present day people, right? So whether they
are related to us or not, but in Europe,
we have no evidence beyond the neanderthals in Asia,
we have Hoor actus much earlier than the neanderthals.
The neanderthals appeared around half a million years ago.
And then there are, you know, there's fossil evidence
for Homo erectus at 1.5 as I said in
Java and interestingly east of Java. Uh SO already
in the Eastern Indonesia, Indonesian Islands, you have other
fossil groups, uh homo fluorescence and Hoin Sis and
you have stone tool records for at least 700,000
years on those islands, which is quite remarkable.
And what about Homo He Heidelberg? I mean, it
is, it, is, is that species associated with any
out of Africa migrations or
not? Yeah, I guess the Heidelberg is, I mean,
it depends who you ask could be thought of
as a place like a placeholder, but these are
like this transition fossils, right, that people always debate.
Um AGAIN, it's showing the high Albert against, this
is showing you that uh the classification of these
groups into archaic moderns, neanderthals, erectus, whatever that morphological
classification, it's very, very useful, it, it is very
accurate in some cases, but it can be problematic
in others, right? Because what do you do with
fossil forms that have sort of mixed traits or
that you can't really classify? And so aid Albert
against is the transition between neanderthals and humans. And,
you know, Adalbert against is sort of sitting in
between. Um YOU know, that's, that's um you can
some people classified as a different species, right? You
know, that that's a different thing, you know. Um
And this goes back to, you know, the tradition
of uh taxonomy, right, where some people are more
prone to split and some people are more prone
to lump. And uh and that's so that's another
example of what do you do? Uh I always
like to think about uh these problems of taxonomical
classification of human groups. And I like to call
them groups and not species, which already also, I
think shows what, where I stand on the debate.
Um But I, I always like to think about
other species, right? What would we do if we
were talking about different species that is not humans?
Would we be so prone to divide and classify
uh these groups as like different species? Um And
it's also like a, a bit daunting to think
about, you know, that what we're doing when we're
classifying is really um in many ways, um racially
profiling uh groups, right? Even if they are extinct
groups, right? What you're asking is, is this group
based on these characteristics fundamentally different from this other
group, right? This is what um it's the same
for genetics, right? If you're comparing two different genetic
sequences and you're asking, is this genetic sequence different
from this genetic sequence? What you're asking really is,
is, can I split these two groups into two
different species or two different groups? And how do
you decide this? Is this an arbitrary reason? Is
this because, you know, when, when do you go
from, oh, we could group them to, you know,
they shouldn't belong together and that we should be
aware of that, right? Uh That, that's what we
are doing uh in human evolution. So when you're
thinking about all of these groups and all of
these species, and of course, what we're all we're
trying is to, to, to tell our story, right?
We're interested in our story. I wanna tell our
story. I think it's great. Um But we need
to be very careful in how we're thinking about
these problems. Uh And um yeah, anyway, we can,
we can keep going and we can back, can
come back to this point if you want.
Yeah. So I, I wasn't expecting to go there,
but actually, let's dig a little bit deeper into
that. I mean, I I've already asked also on
the show several times the question about uh species
classification in and of evolution. And I know that
there's tons of discussions surrounding that, but actually, you
mentioned something there that I don't quite remember anyone
at least directly mentioning in, in my previous conversations
on the show. I mean, where you basically, you
said that at least to a certain extent there
might be an element of racialization when we're thinking
about species classification, particularly in this case, since we
are uh comparing homo sapiens to other very, very
closely related species, phylogenetic phylogenetic speaking. Uh So that,
that's interesting. So do you think that perhaps to
a certain extent there might be an element of
uh uh I mean, I will say politicization here
when it comes to uh perhaps as wanting or
allowing for certain um uh hominins to be classified
as human or not? Let's say le le le
let's perhaps put it that we start with that
and then we can go on from there.
Yeah, I think, I think that um pe people
are always more drawn in the to look for
differences, right? I mean, we're trying to explain processes
of differentiation, right? Evolution is a process that through
each um things that are the same become different.
Um And so, and that that is sort of
unstoppable, right? Evolution keeps generating diversity, it keeps differentiating
things that were once the same. So we're obviously
drawn to look for differences. Now, we, we know
since the, you know, uh at, at least I'm
gonna be gentle, at least since the second half
of the 20th century that there's no scientific basis
to talk about groups of people today is like
anything different in a meaningful way. Mhm So we
can talk about, there are no, there are differences
between people, right? You and I are different, right.
Right. You know, I'm different from my parents. The
questions, right? The question is, is that meaningful? Right?
And there's no evidence that there's any meaningful differences,
right.
00, ok. But then with this meaningful mean
here. So let's go back, let's go to, that's,
that's good. Let's go to that racial classification of
people, right? People of present day people. Mhm The
basis for those classifications are meaningless. Right. Right. For
what, what people proposed in the beginning, for example,
the fact that some, you know, geographical groups were
inferior to others, right, Europeans, right. Europeans went and
colonized every uh uh all parts of the world.
And this idea that the European some somehow were
more, uh, were brighter or more developed or whatever,
right? That is completely shattered. There's no basis for
that meaning that's meaningless. But you can still say
that Europeans are, you know, uh they have lighter
skin than say Africans. So that's an obvious statement.
Now, is it meaningful? That's what I'm asking. And
you could say, well, it depends, right? You know,
darker skin might help uh prevent, you know, skin
damage caused by UV. So it could be meaningful
that way, right? But you need to be, I
mean, I guess if you wanna bring meaning to
this or you're gonna say it's meaningful, then the
burden of proof is on whoever is saying that
there's meaningful differences and there, what I'm saying is
there's no evidence for that, right? So to say
that there are no differences, of course, there are
differences and we know very well how those differences
emerge. The question is, are those differences warranting racial
classifications? No. Are those differences warranting any sort of
hierarchical grouping of people? No. Right. I think that's
scientifically pretty well established. Now, you go back to
the archaic. Now we're looking at other groups that
we are not associating or we have not been
associating with the modern humans right now that, you
know, we're looking at the fossils and we're saying
Oh, look, this brow ridge is different. This, you
know, the uh rib cage is different. Um The
bones are thicker or less or more dense or
less dense or whatever. And we're saying therefore, this
is different and therefore this is a different species.
And what I'm asking or what I was trying
to allude to is that reflects I'm not saying
that people that are doing this are, that's not
what I'm saying. Right. I'm not, I'm not passing
any judgment on the people that are doing this.
I'm just saying that the reasoning behind those types
of approaches are inherently racial classifications. Mhm. Right. They
are looking for differences. They're not saying that they
are meaningful. They're not saying that the neanderthals were
this or that or whatever, but what they are
is they are profiling and we need to, I
mean, we just need to understand that that's what,
that's what the field is doing. And I guess
this is important because how we then construct or
reconstruct the history of our being on the planet
and how we relate or do not relate to
these groups is informed by these perceptions. Does that
make sense? I hope that.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, no. It, it makes lots
of sense. And by the way, let me just
also add to that, that if people are interested,
I've already have on the show several conversations with
geneticists, evolutionary biologists and anthropologists, both paleoanthropologists and biological
anthropologists and I mean, I don't think that there's
any basis for racial classification and, uh, uh, I
don't think that anyone can make a strong argument,
at least nowadays with the information we have that
race is scientifically meaningful in any way. I mean,
it's basically a social and political uh, construct, basically.
And, but, but on the other hand, uh, I
mean, on what you were saying just a few
seconds ago, uh, in terms of how that translates
into perhaps to a certain extent, how we think
about other ominous species and how we classify those
different species and how we think they relate to
us. Uh I was going to say actually that
uh perhaps uh uh not so much today, I
guess, I mean, if we talk to anthropologists and
other scientists, I don't think that people would talk
in that way, but there's perhaps a legacy from
an earlier history in anthropology, not only with actually
the use of racial classification, but also the way
we, it uh thought about our relationship to other
ominous species where for example, it's very common to
hear people using, oh, you're a Neanderthal as an
insult, for example, right. So there, there, there, there's
perhaps I I'm not, I wouldn't say perhaps in
terms of the among the pe people who are
part of the scientific community, but the broader public,
let's say still has to deal to deal with
some of these uh earlier scientific legacy of how
we fought about how we relate, not only to
other ominous species, but also to other human populations
across the globe.
Right. And, and that for sure. And the, the,
the problem with that is, uh, you know, again,
we going back to the same, right. There's no
scientific basis for any type of, you know, uh
racism. Somebody was telling me, uh the problem is
not the racist, the problem is racism. Right. Right.
Um And that, that was alluding to the fact
that there are, there aren't measurable differences. And so
what we know exactly what the process is, the
demographic processes that are causing these differences are, but
I'll let me maybe go into a slightly um
not a tangent but something maybe that will help
frame why. OK. Um Why we tend to think
about uh this hierarchical clustering of groups, right? Because
oh, they are different. Therefore, one must be better
and that, that in evolution is rooted through the
to the start of the discipline, right? And evolution
by natural selection implies or seemingly implies that, you
know, these things like the survival of the fittest,
right? If the two things are different and one
takes over, then one must be better. And because
I'm a population geneticist, right, that is interested in
human evolution. But my background is population genetics, we're
forced to really think about the processes through which
diversity emerges through which certain variants take over, right?
And what we, what I can tell you is
that most of the diversity existing today, right, in
present day people is um functionally neutral, right? Doesn't
do anything and it's fluctuating. So some variants are
at the higher frequency in Asia than they are
in the Americas or vice versa. It's not because
it's better or it's worse. It's because the processes,
the demographic processes chance created those differences. But evolution
by random chance is a much less appealing title
than the survival of the fittest or evolution by
natural selection. And of course, you know, and so
those there are also, there are also sort of
um historical contexts for how we are thinking about
these problems, how we're thinking about differences coming from
how we understand evolution and what, what it is,
right? Uh EVEN the word evolution, right? As if,
as if like that, this process of change is
creating always something that is better and that, that
is not only by the way, it's not only
on among the general public, a lot of scientists
believe that, you know, the process of change of
the, of the, the DNA sequencing is improving something,
right? The chances that it's improving or it's actually
making it worse. You know, I'm not sure what's
what's more likely actually, I think, I think it's
much more likely to create damage by using, by
having a mutation. But, you know, so what I'm
trying to say is that you cannot disconnect all
of these things, these are people's imagination. And when
we are looking at the data, there are objective
things we can measure and there are a lot
of reconstructions that are, as you said, political, uh
they are historical, they are, you know, and we
need to, we need to understand that we need
to understand that and try, you know, the issue
is when we take something that is reconstructed and
we take it as dog mine, we take it
as fact and it's politically informed rather than anything
else. So we need to be very careful both
ways in whatever way. I'm not trying to say
um uh to say anything about specific politics. I'm
just, you know, trying to bring to, to, to
the attention, you know, to our viewers that, you
know, uh science is not immune to that, you
know, it has never been.
Uh No, I, I think this is actually great
because I think it perhaps makes for a good
segue into the next topic because I was actually
going to ask you about uh interbreeding between Homo
sapiens, neanderthals and possibly also the, the Nivens. But
ju just before we get into the interbreeding itself,
uh tell us a little bit more about the
Denisovans. So where exactly do they come from? And
how do they phylogenetic relate to other hominids?
The vans are the greatest mystery I would say
in human evolution at the moment. Uh THE knees
ones are classified or identified based on the DNA
on DNA evidence from a pinky finger from a
fragment of a pinky finger found in uh a
Siberia cave uh called the Nizo a cave. Um
And when geneticists, uh the group of Shante Pao
and, and Leipzig and, and colleagues, when they sequence
that uh fragment of bone, um they realized that
the DNA sequence was remarkably different from that of
present day people on average. Yeah. And that it
was similar to the neanderthals but also quite distinct.
And then they estimated the split times between these
different groups based on the variants that were different
between these sequences. And what they saw is that
or they estimated is that Dennis have split from
the modern human lineage perhaps 700,000 years ago and
their separation from the neanderthals might have occurred around
500,000. Of course, don't take this as like literal
dates, right? Of course. And the margin for us
could be 200,000 years either way, right? Because there
are all sorts of assumptions that we have in
terms of generation, time, musician rates and so on
right now, what is very interesting is that when
they looked at the distribution of, you know, first
they asked, did this group which we didn't know
it's, we can say it again, we can look
at things and say this is different from that.
Can we call it a different species? Yeah, I
don't know. You tell Mexican, we can we call
it a different species? We, we, what we, what
we found, what, what they found is that this
group had contributed to the pre to present day
genetic diversity um of humans. So, in particular, in
Asia, people carried the needs of an ancestry. They
carried this to this day. It's very, very small
fragment. Uh It's about a small proportion, about uh
1% or less. But then if you go to
Island, Southeast Asia to go to the eastern Islands
of Indonesia, and if you go to Australia to
New Guinea, this proportion can go up to like
four or 5%. Now is Southeast Asia and Australia
are very, very far away from Siberia. There are
thousands of kilometers away from Siberia and I'll, I'll
stop here for now. So these are the needs
of them. This is what we know.
Oh, ok. These are the Denisovans. We've also already
touched a little bit on the Neanderthals. So, are
these at least as far as we know the
two, the only two ominous species we homo sapiens
interbred with?
Well, yes. And to the extent these are the
two groups, you know, that are considered extinct. Uh
You know, there are two fossils from which we
were able to retrieve DNA. And the two out
of two, we get into breeding, right? So you
get DNA from Neanderthals, you, oh, is that, is
that, was that interbreeding between Neanderthals and the ancestors
of present day people. Yes, you get DNA from
the pinky finger. The Denise events was that interbreeding
between uh this group and the ancestors of present
day people? Yes. So, yeah, they are the only
two, but they are the only two we could
test directly. And then when you look around and
you can ask, you know, uh do, does the
genome, does the human genome around the world? Do,
does the human genome carry any evidence for, you
know, mixing with other groups? Uh And so far
the answer is like, not really, but
so uh th this is very interesting the basically
the history of our interbreeding with these other uh
groups, species wherever you want to call them. Uh
So, uh because uh this is actually, and that's
one of the reasons why I said earlier that
the previous conversation we have would make for a
good segue into this part of our talk today
because uh didn't the uh doesn't this also put
into perspective the way we think about uh hominid
species and how ho we homo sapiens relate to
some other uh hominids that we classify as a
different species because we were able to interbreed with
them. Of course, this perhaps points to a sort
of definition of species that is probably out of
date by now where it would be something along
the lines of, of all the two individuals are
part of the same species if they are able
to reproduce between themselves and generate basically fertile, fertile
offspring or something like that. So that, that's perhaps
pointing more to that. But a anyway, do, do
you think that these would have, uh, our interbreeding
with other hominins would have any implications as to
how we think about the way we classify species
and how we relate to other hominids?
Yes, I think that's, yeah. So I'm biased. Right.
I'm a biologist. So I will take the bio
biological concept of species, right? Uh WHICH is an
arbitrary way as well. Like you can think of
it as an arbitrary way to define a species.
So if they can interbreed, then they are, they
belong to the same species and we know that,
you know, in real life examples and other species
like birds, for example, there are contact zones or
certain groups can interbreed. But then if you go,
you know, they can, they can. So for example,
in latitude, right, they can interbreed with adjacent latitudes.
But then if you take the populations from the
extremes of the distribution, they can't interbreed anymore, but
the genes are traveling all the way across. So,
are these the same species or not? So, anyway,
so there are limits to that concept as well.
But I'll, I'll take another, I'll, I'll take it
through another lens. It's not only that they've interbred,
it's let's think about what 2% mean, what does
it mean to have? 2% Neanderthal and what it
means is that this significant proportion of Neanderthal variants
in present day Europeans implies that the ancestors of
well Europeans and, and, and people around the world,
it implies that that proportion resulted from interbreeding events,
not sporadic but family units, right? That, that takes
you to the to the point where you have
to, you know, assume that the most likely scenario
is that these were family units, people were not
just like randomly, you know, encountering each other on
the landscape and say, oh, there's another, there's a,
someone from another group, from another species and, you
know, let's sporadically, uh you know, interbreed with them.
These, these contacts occur through hundreds thousands of years.
They resulted in family units, they likely had shared
culture. You know, there's the question about Neanderthal language
all the time. I would, I would say, I
mean, I'm, I'm no expert on this, but I
would say definitely they were speaking the same languages
so that they have language.
I would say that's the most likely scenario. Some
people would disagree there studies.
No, I, I mean, actually that is very interesting
because uh as you said, some people disagree, but
there's also on the other hand, and of course,
I'm not sure to what extent he is right
on that or not. But there's uh a linguist
Daniel Everett, that makes a very, at least interesting
argument, I would say as to uh how uh
homo reactors are already at language. So,
yeah, like I, I would, I would have no
issue with that at all. Like as a, you
know, as a theoretical concept, I have no issue
with that. I mean, and then again, you know,
if, if what we are observing is that this?
So OK, so let's get back to the interbreeding
before we go to the language or the culture.
Sure. Sure. So if, what we are seeing is
that neanderthals integrated the ancestors of modern humans we've
also seen and we've talked about this, that modern
humans, there was sort of radiations out of out
of Africa before the main, the main out of
Africa, like by modern humans that resulted in identifiable
genetic footprints of modern human DNA into the Neanderthal
gene pool. We know that neanderthals in the knees
of evens interbred and coexisted in the knees of
a cave, we know the knees of events interbred
in modern humans. So every combination that is possible
that we can test meaningfully like meaningfully in the
sense that like that we can statistically get really
good signal from the data for which we have
data. All the possibilities so far have come out
to positive people have mixed people have interpreted with
each other. Now, what does that, what that starts
to me painting a picture of? Sure human groups
were relatively isolated. Sure, they could start developing some
sort of feature because you know, physical feature, physical
trait because of either just random chance as we've
discussed or some adaptation, it could be some adaptation
to local environments. But to think of this as
isolated units that were not interbreeding with anyone that,
you know, there were different species. I think it
has no bearing anymore. To be honest, I think
IIII I like to think of humans as uh
you know, all the, all the, all these groups,
Homo aus, the NAOS neanderthals, the moderns. Sure it's
useful, you can talk about them as separate entities
and have conversations, right? But to, to, to have
to think that that would translate again meaningfully into
separate species or, you know, iii I just don't,
I just don't see, see how that's possible in
light of the current genetic evidence of widespread admixture
or widespread uh you know, interbreeding between these groups.
I just can't see it because to me, you
know, they're starting to emerge a picture as well
as like lithic transfer between groups, right? I mean,
I don't think this is going to last much
longer, but, you know, as a robust scientific theory
that these are separate species or whatever, like I
think, I think they're just one, like we are
one species, call it homo, put it all in
the homogenous and say homo is a species and
then within homo, there's different groups that you can
intelligibly discuss, but biologically they're not necessarily meaningful. Now,
you could say, but I think a really good
way to classify a species is to, you know,
look at the rate at which a particular stone
ax is made by a particular group. And therefore,
because it's a different culture that the stone axes
in a particular way, this is a different species.
OK? If that's, if that's how you want to
classify them and that's the drawers, you wanna sort
of construct, then that's fine. But you need, you
need to specify what you, what you mean by
species. And I guess this is another issue, right?
Is that the concept of species is really artificial,
right? It's, it's useful, it's very, very useful, but
it doesn't always work. Uh You can always find
exceptions to the rules and then unless you define
exactly what you mean, like we can't really have
a conversation, you know, in the sense that maybe
you'll interview someone next and say no, no, clearly,
these are different species and it's not that we
are disagreeing with one another is that the definitions
that we have are different,
but particularly when it comes to how we relate
to neanderthals, I guess it's very interesting because there's
all of these, an entire set of questions, let's
say about how neanderthals went extinct, I guess. Uh
AND perhaps we can also discuss that but, and
I guess that uh it's very common for people
to try to bring to the table suggestions or
hypothesis about how neanderthals went extinct because they were
not as biologically or evolutionarily fit as Homo sapiens
or perhaps they were inferior to us again, going
back to that discussion surrounding race and all of
that inferior to us in certain aspects. Like for
example, they were less intelligent, they, the their sociality
was less complex, their culture was less complex stuff
like that. So, is there any evidence of uh
meaningful differences be uh biologically speaking, uh cognitively speaking
between neanderthals and Homo sapiens? And, and by by
the way, if you want to comment on the
bit about them going extinct, uh go ahead.
Well, I think so you can take people across
the world. Yeah, uh today and identify the Neanderthal
segments in their genome and reconstruct entire Neanderthal genomes
from that, right? So we can, we can basically
recreate a Neanderthal without even taking the DNA from
the fossil anymore just because we can identify those
bits as Neanderthal because we had a fossil, right?
For which we would measure. What does that tell
you about them being extinct? So what, so if
you take a modern and we've done this like
people, I I not our group but other groups
have done this. If you look at the contribution
of modern, of what we are calling ancient modern
humans, these are the modern humans that left Africa
their first, they are paleolithic under gatherers in Europe.
And you know, it's mostly in Europe and some
of them have not contributed to people today, but
they are more than human are they extinct? So
that's my. So there are neanderthals who contributed to
the genetic diversity of present day people. We're saying
the neanderthals are extinct. There are modern humans, ancient
modern humans that have not yet, no one's saying
that they are extinct, right? So, but extinction, uh
you know, when we're, when we're talking about genetic
differences of invariants, like, you know, you and I,
as we say it, right? We, you and I
are different because biologically different because we have variants
in our genome that differ from one another. What
I can promise you is that the differences that
separate you and I will also eventually vanish. You
just need time. Everything gets extinct in time. So,
so, but to say that a group that contributed
2% of ancestry of present day people is extinct.
To me again, if you want to say that
there's no one around with specific physical traits that
that group had. Sure, sure that and that those
traits no longer exist. Yeah, like I can't argue
with that, but we have observed those traits around,
right? Until we do, we can consider them extinct.
And we've looked, I guess quite enough, there's 7
billion people or, or 8 billion people on the
planet at the moment. It's not like we've looked
at everyone, but we've looked at enough people. You
could say that those traits are extinct, that's different
to say that the group is extinct. You know
what I mean, so that's my take on the
extinction bit. And the other is like when you're
talking about, yeah. And the reasons for that. Right.
So I don't even go to the reasons because
I don't think they are extinct in that way.
Uh, AND so there is, first of all, I
don't think there's any robust evidence, culturally from artifacts
from, you know, uh, from the fossil record that
suggests that the tools were less sophisticated. That was
true in the beginning. But I think that's that
picture again, when you're looking at borrowings between ethics
across these groups, uh The picture starts to be
uh way more complex. And so it's always an
attack on the hubris of the, of the moderns
uh that, you know, somehow these archaic, they, you
know, they kept on, on existing, they kept on
like passing their ethics, they kept on passing their
genes. Um So those, those, those constructions are uh
are to me, uh very fragile in terms of
the scientific evidence. Again, you wanna say a specific
trait is gone, share, you wanna say specific stone
ax disappeared or whatever lithic what? Yeah, sure. Uh
But we, I mean, think about this, if I
tell you that 2% of your family, it's like
it's not your family or it is only 98%
of your family is really your family. You belong
to this 98% the 2% with, without whom you
would be here. They're not part of your tree,
they're not part of your family. That's weird. I
would say, uh, also there's, uh, another thing, um,
if you think about how genetic information is passed
on from generation to generation, right? You're only 25%
your grandparents, right? So you have four grandparents. So
you get 25% of them each, on average. If
you go back one generation, it's halved 12.5% and
they keep, you keep halving that right. That means
that for you to inherit 2% of the neanderthals,
that 2% had to be everywhere, everyone had to
have it. So you now have the 2%. Otherwise,
if no, if if people, some people didn't have
the, the 2% would not necessarily survive, right? The
chances of that passing on would not be high.
So everyone having 2% from a specific group that
is identified based on a specific fossil that is
identified then based on specific DNA taken from those
fossils is quite limiting, right? So if you, if
you take the same, that's why I brought the
ancient modern humans. If you, if you have the
same type of rigorous uh constraint on who are
the ancestors who, who went extinct, then there are
no, basically uh there would be no groups alive
yet there are 8 billion people. That's what I
mean. So,
yeah, but, but that's why I asked you also
uh to comment on neanderthals going extinct because, I
mean, o of course, I, I never want to
be arrogant or anything like that. I mean, I
don't have an anthropology degree. I've just talked with
lots of people on the show about those way.
But, but, but again, I mean, it, it always
sounded, I mean, not always but, uh, for a
long while now it, it sounded a bit weird
to me why we would say that neanderthals, we
really went extinct if we have that high of
a percentage of their DNA in Homo sapiens. I
mean, I, I always found that a little bit
weird. O of course, uh again, I could have
been missing some aspects. I, I mean, I, I
don't know, someone could come and say, oh if
you also share 99% of your DNA with chimpanzees.
So if tomorrow chimpanzees go extinct, I mean, tomorrow
there's no, there's not one single chimpanzee on earth
just because you have 1% or 0.1% of their
DNA. Does that mean that chimpanzees never went extinct?
I mean, oo, of course, there's those kinds of
questions that we could ask but, but, but still,
it always sounded a bit weird to me and
even particularly because, uh, it never seemed to me
that there was much evidence to really make a
strong case for Homo sapiens having out competed Homo
Neanderthal lenses on the basis of being cognitively or
culturally superior in any meaningful way. So
regard, let me just clarify something with chimps with
the chimps. When you say we're 98% chimps or
99% like the chimps. What you're saying is that
across the genome, right? The entire code, if you
look at the entire code, 98% or 99% 98%
I think is, is the same. That's what you're
saying. When you're saying you're 2% Neanderthal. That's not
what you're saying. That that's not what we are
saying. What we are saying is that around the
world because that, and that's why I was saying,
you know, if you take people across the world,
you could reconstruct Neanderthal genomes because you and I
do not have necessarily the same 2%. Mhm. There
are 2% in the gene pool but it's not
shared, right? You might have some who, who, you
know, your 2% and my 2% might add up
to 4% or to 3%. You know what I
mean? When is, when is when you're talking about
the 98% chimp, it's shared, it's fixed. Does that,
does that make sense? It might be a bit
confusing to wrap your head around this. But one
thing is the variation that is segregating in the
populations and it's when I say it's 2% and
that everybody has it, it's not that everybody has
the same 2%. But because I have 2% let's
say my I have 2%. My wife has 2%.
Our kid will have 1% from me. 1% from
her. Our kid keeps the 2%. Right. But now
my kid is gonna have 2% Neanderthal DNA that
I don't have like, at least 1% I don't
have that. Does that make sense? So, some, because
we get this question a bit, you know, like
even, you know, in family discussions or whatever. So
what, what does that mean? Like 2% Neanderthal but
we are 98% chimp, right? It's different that way,
right? It's, it's, it's different in that way. One
is the architecture of the genome, the the we're
not talking about diversity, everybody is the same on
those 98% everybody. It's exactly the same, the 2%
Neanderthal or, you know, uh not exactly but virtually
the same, the 2% is slightly different, right? The
2% is uh the, the Neanderthal 2% is not
the same. It's not comparable to the 98% shape.
We're talking about two different things. I hope that
was clear.
Mhm No, no, no, no. Oo of course, of
course. And, and thank you for that clarification. Uh
uh Also because uh I, I mean, I will
in my head uh I was thinking one thing
but then I said that we have just 1%
of chimp DNA that, that uh so, so I
got it reversed a anyway. So uh but, but
that's very interesting because also another question that I
wanted to ask you today is so what questions
about our origins and evolution? And by our, I
mean, I'm not just referring to Homo sapiens but
to AINS more generally, can genetics help answer? I
mean, in this case, genetics alone, how much information
can we get from genetics alone?
Well, from genetics alone, you can only get uh
to understand whether particular groups, you know, mixed or
did not mix or, you know, you can also
ask, and we have, we have worked on this,
you can ask, um you know, what's the likelihood
that even groups that are not sampled? You know,
you can theory, you can abstract on it and
by looking at present day people, you can abstract
and say if there is a group that I
haven't sampled, you know, but that would have split
around this time would have these characteristics, genetic characteristics.
Would, you know, do I have, do we have
any evidence of mixing? Uh GENETICS itself alone can
only answer that genetics always needs to reconstruct human
history. Genetics always needs to bring together the archaeological
record always. And then if you want to ask
questions about language or about culture or I mean,
I can speculate, but we need to bring on
experts from those disciplines, right? And uh what I
think the what I'm really interested is how genetics
can be used in ways that are nontraditional for
genetics, right? For example, uh can we use um
the 2% DNA from, you know, neanderthals, for example,
can we like, how much does that information help
us rethink? This is the discussion we were having,
right? How much does that help us rethink culture?
How much does that help us rethink like? So
I think the implications of genetics are way beyond
uh the exact, you know, inference um of ancestries
or whatever. But they need to be, you know,
they need to be integrated that you can't just
say, all right. So I need, I need an
archaeologist now because I need to, you know, know
the date of this, this, that's, you know, if,
if you sit down and talk to people, I
think uh what genetics can bring or, and, and
by the way, it's not just genetics, it's any
discipline they can bring is way more than just
a disciplinary contribution to the problem. I think they
can help you rethink the problem. Uh They can
help reframe the question uh those discussions. And so
that's what I'm interested in. And by the way,
there's uh in interdisciplinary, there's uh an author, an
anthropologist Georgina born. She, she refers to this as
the reconfiguration of disciplines. This is how, how you
bring perspectives from different disciplines can actually not just
add, it's not the, it's not the whole is
more than the sum of the parts, right? So
it's not just adding information, it's actually helping us
rethink a lot of, of, uh, of what we
are doing and, and you've seen, right? I mean,
the Denise, for example, is a really good example
as well if you know how genetics just described
a particular group. And now this is opening all
sorts of questions, right? We're having to look at
the fossil record again and it's, you know, uh,
so what can genetics answer? I mean, who knows?
I mean, I think movements, of course, the, the
things that people have been using genetics for, you
know, what is the ancestry of present day people?
Can we trace the movements of people in the
landscape? Can we identify variants that help people adapt
to different environments, all of that? But much more,
I think that is dry, that's still dry. And
I'm a geneticist, right? But I think I'm interested
in opening sort of this too, more, more relatable
questions about, you know, the, the processes, the, you
know, because we're really interested in, in, in or
I am really interested, I'm curious about what, you
know, how did things come to be? And that's
you, you can't just use genetics for that. That
would be too limiting.
So we talked a lot about human disposals. Uh
And we haven't yet uh talked about this concept
of hoin intros. So, uh could you tell us
about that and how we can study more or
learn more about modern human dispersal through it.
Yeah. So ho and integration is simply the app
mixture, right? Like it's basically the way that we
are, we were talking about mixing between populations, right?
And the term sort of the jargon for that
is um hominid in progress. Uh But it's essentially
like you're looking at present day people across the
world and you're trying to identify pieces of their
DNA that, you know, were inherited from these different
groups, say the neanderthals and Denisovans and that's known
as hominid in aggression, right? By comparing those different
proportions, not just the proportion of say Neanderthal or
Denise and DNA, but also, you know, the frequencies
of the variants, right? We can, that's sort of,
that gives us another signal of demographic processes that
led, you know, to the peopling of certain places
that led to the geographical spread of people across
the continent. And so, and when we look at
this, so you could, you could actually, for example,
because everybody carries 2% Neanderthal that is living outside
of Africa carries 2% Neanderthal DNA. You know, you
can start saying, OK, so if that is the
case where, where is it likely to have occurred?
Right? Um And you know, you have Neanderthal fossils,
um you know, in Europe and the Middle East,
right? So if people are leaving Africa through, you
know, that parts or through, through the Middle East
and then colonizing Eurasia, then maybe that's a good,
you know, proxy for where maybe this Neanderthal admixture
has occurred. Of course, it doesn't, people do not
just, you know, a mix and then become static.
So there's all these processes people keep, you know,
traveling around and mixing and so on. But because
um the Neanderthal or the Denise of an a
mixture uh or intros hominid Intres those signals are
very clear because these populations were, you know, relatively
diverged, they create sort of these pulses, right? Um
It's, they are very easy to identify. And then
you can start comparing this, you know, proportions and
qualitatively the sequences uh the DNA sequences and start,
you know, reconstructing the puzzle of, oh if you
know this group has the same proportion as this
group, oh, but they're qualitatively different. So that other
event must have occurred after they split. And so
you can start building the puzzle and having a
reconstruction of hominid disperse. Oh sorry human dispersal through
looking or by looking at uh the signals from
the need of an and Neanderthal ancestry.
And since we're talking about admixture here, uh I
would like to ask you about a particular article
of yours uh where you argue or present evidence
that admixture has obscured signals of historical hard sweeps
in humans. So, could you could you tell us
about that article and perhaps specifically explain what hard
sweeps are?
Yes. OK. Uh So, first of all, I, you
know that that is by a colleague of mine
that led that Yasim Soil Me at the University
of Adelaide. He's the first author uh and uh
um Christian Huber who was also at Adelaide uh
and now at the University of Pennsylvania. So they
were the really, really the people leading this. So
in that, in that article, uh what we've done
is that we've uh so hard sweeps are uh
instances, examples of uh positive selection. OK. So if
a mutation emerges in a population and has a
competitive advantage, right to the pre existing variant, uh
the the carriers of that mutation will have a
higher reproductive uh rate. So they, this is called
differential reproduction, Darwinian selection. And that variant is gonna
increase in frequency quite fast depending on how, what,
what's what, what's the relative advantage, right? So the
higher the advantage, the more rapid it can increase
in frequency that increase in frequency because it's very
fast, we call it a sweep. So it sweeps
through the population right now when that occurs, just
imagine, right? This is a new variant occurring on
a particular background. But because it's a new variant,
it will sit on one genetic background, which is
11 chromosome of the entire population, right? If that
sweeps in frequency, we can look at the, we
can look at it computationally. And what we observe
is a decrease in genetic diversity, local genetic diversity
around that variant. So we can identify this right
now. There's been back and forth discussions about how
common was this during human evolution? And what we
have now is that we, we can, we can
access ancient DNA. So we can, you know, we
can look at not only present day genetic diversity,
but you can look at all genetic diversity on
people that are, that have uh diseases long ago.
And so we can start and ask, were these
common, you know, uh in older times, right? In,
in ancient times. And what we have found is
that since humans left Africa, uh in Eurasia, there
were, you know, several of these episodes of selection,
taking alleles to fixation. So sweeping through taking variant
genetic variants through fixation, but those signals have since
been obscured in president. So you can't detect that
signature anymore because the backgrounds that swept and fixed
in the population have since been admixed with non
carriers, right? It's not like the non carriers went
extinct is that this happened in a local specified
time period. But then when, you know, people kept
on, you know, gen genetically or mixing, reproducing those
signatures disappeared. And that's why you can't find them
today. And so that's what that article is about,
right? Is that you could use ancient DNA to
detect signatures of selection that have since been obscured
in present day people. So if you just have
present day genomes, you couldn't observe this. But because
we have ancient, we can look at ancient genomes
and identify those signatures, right? And and then ask,
but why aren't they present anymore? And the explanation
is because there were other people who didn't have
that selection didn't, you know, occur on other, on
all groups, right? And then when they mixed back
then you did, the signal disappears.
OK. So I have two more questions then that
I think from a genetics perspective are also very
interesting for the audience to learn more about also
because they al they are also i informing when
it comes to our own evolution. So what is
balancing selection?
I'm so glad someone asked. Um
I, I have to be the one. So,
no, it's great. No, that's a great question. Um
So people think about, you know, selection, Darwinian selection
as the again one variant being better than another
variant, right? And then of course, this is a
struggle and then one takes over and that's the
survival of the fittest that's known in population genetics
that's called positive selection, right? Um But you could
have instances where, for example, in humans, right? We
are a diploid species that means we carry DNA
from mom and from dad, we have two copies
now. So if we have, if we have one
variant that had advantage towards the other, right? Of
course, we pass each with 50% to our kids.
But in the population, what would happen is that
one would take over, right? But it can be
the case that you have two variants that are
different in a particular gene. And therefore you're a
ne zygote. So you have two co two different
copies. And because you have these two different copies,
you have a selective advantage compared to carriers of
only a single copy. So compared to people that
carry one of the variants in double copy or
the other variant in double copy, right? So you
could think about let's color code this, you can
think about blue, blue, red, red and then someone
would have blue and red. If the people that
have the blue and red have a selective advantage
towards the the the carriers of either the red
or the blue genetic variant, they are more likely
to reproduce, right? Because they transmit this either red
or blue with 50% the red, both the red
and the blue will be maintained in the population
for a longer period. So instead of the blue
or the red taking over both variants, both genetic
variants will carry on. So selection is not favoring
one or the other. It's favoring the diversity. It's
favoring the maintenance of both because the zygotes for
it's one example, the zygotes have a selective advantage.
And we know this, for example, in Africa, um
in regions where malaria is endemic, there is a
variant is the sickle cell anemia variant. So if
you carry that variant in homozygos, so if you
have two copies of that variant, you have sickle
cell anemia and you're very likely, you know, to
die at a very young age if you and
then you have the so called wild type variant,
um which makes you highly susceptible to malaria. So
you're likely to eventually get malaria and potentially die
from malaria. But if you have the sick cell
copy and the wild type copy, you do not
have sickle cell anemia because one copy of the
wild type is enough to have your red blood
cells trans efficiently transporting oxygen in your bloodstream. So
you're not developing sickle cell anemia and you're more
resistant to malaria infection. So the carriers of the
two copies are more likely to survive to an
older age and pass on their genes because because
they pass each with 50% that variant is maintained
at a relatively higher frequency. Now it's not 5050
because of course, if you carry the single cell
anemia variant is more deleterious than the wild type
sort of um uh the the wild that variant.
So the frequency is about 10 to 90%. So
balancing selection is just the way through which selection
maintains diversity in populations, right? That's, that's what balancing
selection is. So it's not like positive selection where
you have one variant taking over. It's a process
through which through time variants are maintained in populations
for longer than expected, right? Because they are selected.
So would that have specific implications as to how
we think about how natural selection works, particularly when
we are talking about um adaptive traits because I
was just thinking that, ok, so if we compare
uh balancing selection to a more, let's say, let's
call it traditional view in genetics, that then translates
of course into how we think about uh traits
that are under selection and how they are over
the over time, spread across particular populations and become
adaptations. Uh I mean, would there be implications there?
Yeah, I mean, so gene in population genetics, balancing
selection is taken into account. So it's, it's considered
a type of natural selection and that right there,
uh, in people's imagination, instead of the general public's
imagination, selection means directional selection or positive selection, as
I said, like the more sort of traditional view.
Um, SO I think in terms of implications for
genetics, they are taken into account in the sense
that we are pretty much aware of the existence
of, of that type. I mean, it's not given
as much attention, uh, even in the field. Um,
THERE'S not a, there's not a lot of people
who I was lucky enough to study it. There's
not a lot of people who, who did to
devote their time to this. Um, BUT yes, uh,
it's taken, it's taken into consideration and you can
really, you can do really interesting things, right, because
you can have variants that segregate so that, you
know, survive in a population for hundreds of thousands
of years. Right. And if they think about this,
if, if, and it also has implications for how
we think about the neanderthals and the knees of
events and so on. Right? Because if now, let's
say you have a meta population and you have
different variants in that population, right? And now one
group goes one way and another group goes another
way and they've never meet and those variants that
were, you know, some people have one, some people
have another variant, they both migrated with people, right?
Let's say that those variants are now under balancing
selection. So they will be maintained in both groups
for a long period of time. And when you're
looking at those two groups, they might now be
even two different species, right? There might be two
different species that cannot reproduce, but they will still
carry the two original variants that were present in
the ancestral population. So there will be parts of
the genome where species A or individuals in species
A let's say will be more similar to individuals
in species B, then they will be to individuals
in their own species on that particular part of
the genome. Does that make sense? Yes. Um And
so these are called trans species uh uh polymorphism.
So these are variants that because they were maintained
by balancing selection, they were able to survive the
speciation event and still segregate to today. And we
have this in humans and chimps, for example. So
humans have some variant, I have some V in
my own DNA that you don't, that you don't,
that I share with a chimpanzee and you have
variant that you share with another chimpanzee and it,
at that part of the genome, you are more
like that chimpanzee than you are like to me
and vice versa, right? The, the, we, you and
I are still part of one species and the
chimpanzees are another species. But the process that led
to that, you know, that, that DNA sequence, that
DN the small bit of DNA, that where you
are more like the other chimp is still there
because it's an ancestral process, right? That, that occurred
really long ago in the ancestors of humans and
chimps. And that has survived the speciation event. I
mean, I guess this is a bit more complicated
to visualize um we can't draw here. But uh
it's fascinating how, what selection can do,
right? Uh And so actually, trans species polymorphisms are
my last question. So you've already explained there what
they are, but how do they evolve and what
can we learn by studying them?
So they emerge. So a trans species polymorphism first
starts as a new variant, right? So there's a
population and that some, someone, you know, a baby
uh carries one variant, a mutation. And we call
this a polymorphism right now that polymorphism, let's say
it's maintained by balancing selection so that baby is
able to have babies and those babies. Well, those
people will then have other babies and so on.
That variant then becomes, let's say a 50% frequency
in the population. So 50% of the people carry
one variant, 50% carry the other or you know,
they carry both as we've discussed, right? So it's
usually it's like 25% carry two copies of 1
25%. They carry two copies of another 50% carry
both copies, right? We're still in one population. 11
variant, one genetic polymorphism that just emerged and became
a 50% variant again. Now you take that example
that I was telling you about that population splits
into two, once those two populations no longer are
the same species. If that genetic variant, if selection
is able to maintain that variant for hundreds of
thousands or even millions of years, right? That results
in, that's what we call a trans species because
there are, these populations are now two species. This
is a trans species polymorphism. It's just a genetic
mutation that is shared between species. Mhm OK. Right.
And it's polymorphic, right? It's not that everybody carries
one, right? It's, they are both present in both
species. What can that tell us about evolution? That
can tell us that? Imagine a pro I mean,
you pass on your alleles or your genetic variants
with 50% probability in one generation. If you take
millions of years, the probability that randomly a variant
passes on and survives for millions of years is
virtually zero. Right. Mhm. So they all go extinct
like the neanderthals. Um I was joking but so
if you take that, you know that process for
millions of years, it's not, it, it's just not
likely at all that, that variant would survive by
chance. So you need to invoke selection, you need
to say this variant, this polymorphism is doing something
right? That this diversity to be maintained, it has
to do something and then it becomes interesting. And
when we look at what are the genes that
are carrying these variants, we're seeing, for example, genes
related to immun immunity. So apparently how you recognize
viruses and how you recognize, you know, uh micro
organisms that could infect uh your body, how, how
our genetic apparatus like how the proteins that are,
you know, doing that recognition, how they are encoded.
Apparently it pays off to have a lot of
diversity within them because the theory goes, you're more
likely to recognize a wider array of micro organisms
and therefore your body has the ability to sort
of fight uh different infections and be much more
efficient in recognizing that. So when we look at
balancing selection and look at these trans species bo
morphisms, what we see is that they are located
in regions of the genome that are mostly responsible
for immune responses.
Mhm No. Th this is very interesting. But uh
so my last question will be then by taking
into account things like balancing selection and trans species
polymorphisms. What implications does that uh does that have
specifically for how we understand human evolution and how
we relate to other hominids?
Well, not, not directly necessarily, right? But for example,
um you could ask whether the similarities between, you
know, humans and Neander, there was a question that
in the beginning, uh people asked was, you know,
are the similarities between humans and neanderthals just resulting
from mixing or are they simply, you know, maintenance
of genetic diversity, either through selection or through chance
that is surviving in certain groups but not in
others, but does not result from mixing uh but
rather result from these processes. So, uh and I
think the evidence really suggests that there's no uh
that interbreeding was really the cause for those similarities.
Um But again, you can also ask for selection,
not just trans species, but the polymorphisms, but selection
in general, you can ask, you know, whether the
Neanderthals, for example, experience the similar similar uh selective
pressures as say to modern humans. Um And yeah,
I think, I think selection is always an interesting
way to study human evolution in the sense that
it tells you about the processes that you know,
were beyond just the random chance of passing on
variants. But it tells you something about the interactions
with the environment even if those are rare. Um
It will tell you something about that. Um Yeah,
OK. Great. So, uh, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Well, yeah, I mean, I guess I'm on Twitter
on, uh, I guess it's a Dr, uh, Siete
Sheer. Um, AND I, yeah, I'm on Twitter. You
can find me on Twitter. I'm not sure if
that's my handle but you can, you know, you
can Google or you can search on Twitter uh
for me. Uh And yeah, um get in touch,
I guess. And uh yeah, I, I post all
of my work there. Uh And I do have
comments on other people's work sometimes nice, sometimes not
that nice. Uh And what they also, they also
comment sometimes nicely, sometimes not that nicely, but it's
always a place to discuss science in, in a
very interesting way. So that's where you can find
me.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. I really
love the conversation. Thank you. Hi guys. Thank you
for watching this interview. Until the end. If you
liked it, please share it. Leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by the N Lights learning and development. Then
differently check their website at N lights.com and also
please consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal.
I would also like to give a huge thank
you to my main patrons and paypal supporters, Pero
Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O
of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitten Bear, no wolf,
Tim Ho Eric A LJ Conners Philip for Connolly.
Then the Mere Robert Wine in NAI Z Mark
Nevs Colin Ha Brookfield, Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre
Francis for Agns Ferus and H Herz Michel J
and Lain Jy and the Hes Mark Smith J
Tom Hummel Ssl Wilson, ro Ro Jan Punters, Charlotte
Bli Nico Barba Adam Hunt Pavloski, Nele Bach Me,
Gary Almansa Zal and Ye Pin Bar boso Julian
Price Edward Hall Broner Douglas Fry Frank la Gil
Cortez Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn Jeff mcmahon. Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the
B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perros, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla.
Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers, these our web, Jim Frank Luca, Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden and to my executive
producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.